# Hammer Excercise 1 - Hammers as a "Genetic Barcode"

## Objective

Understand the concept of a "Genetic Barcode", which includes what we call "Hammers" as a special case.

## Materials

## Exercises

You are probably familiar with the use of "barcodes" to identify a product or to encode a device's serial-number. In bioinformatics, we use readily identifiable sequences of DNA to serve as a "barcode" for a genome.

1. Ask Grimoire to tell you what is meant by a "Genetic Barcode".

2. Ask Grimoire what properties and characteristics make a sequence a good "genetic barcode".

3. In exercise (1.), Grimoire probably gave you examples of "barcodes" that are more relevant to plants or animals. If so, ask it what would serve as a "barcode" for Bacteria.

4. In exercise (3.) Grimoire most likely gave you the "16S Ribosomal RN"A as its example for Bacteria. Ask it whether protein-encoding genes can also serve as "barcodes".

5. Ask Grimoire which properties or characteristics of a protein-encoding gene would make that gene a good "genetic barcode".

6. In this course, we will be particularly interested in a type of "genetic barcode" that we call a "Hammer". "Hammers" are defined as 20-character DNA sequences that satisfy the following properties:

    * They occur exactly once in exactly one genome that is a member of a set of special genomes that we will call "Representative Genomes" ("RepGen Set" for short).

    * They are found within a particular class of genes that encode what we call "Singly-Occuring Universal Roles" ("SOURs" for short). A SOUR is characterized as follows:
        *  It is "Singly Occurring", which means that a genome contains exactly one copy of a gene that implements this function.
        * It serves a "Universal Role", that is it can be expected to occur within every genome.

7. SOURs are often (although not always) part of the "Central Machinery" of a cell. Ask Grimoire to tell you what is meant by "Central Machinery of a Cell".

The observation of a "Hammer" within a genome serves as strong evidence that it is closely related to the Representative genome from which that hammer was derived. The more hammers from a given representative that a genome contains, the more likely it is that that genome is closely related to that representative.

We will learn how to find SOURs, construct Sets of Representatives, and extract sets of Hammers in later exercises.

